README.md, before:

# The DEFSTAR library


Defstar is a collection of Common Lisp macros that can be used in place of
`defun`, `defmethod`, `defgeneric`, `defvar`, `defparameter`, `flet`, `labels`,
`let*` and `lambda`. Each macro has the same name as the form it replaces, with
a star added at the end, e.g. `defun*`. (the exception is the `let*`
replacement, which is called `*let`).

The macros allow:

* easy inclusion of type declarations for arguments in lambda lists
* easy inclusion of return type declarations in function and method definitions
* easy declaration of variables as 'ignored', by the use of '_' as a
  placeholder variable in argument lists.
* easy inclusion of assertions for each argument and for the function's
  return value, thus allowing simple programming by contract.

See below for a detailed discussion of each macro, with usage examples.

Defstar's home is at http://bitbucket.org/eeeickythump/defstar/.

Installation requires [ASDF][] or [Quicklisp][]. Defstar does not depend on
any other libraries.


[ASDF]: http://common-lisp.net/project/asdf/
[Quicklisp]: http://quicklisp.org


## Function definitions


The function-defining macros (`defun*`, `flet*`, `labels*`, `lambda*`) work the
same as their normal counterparts, with the following exceptions:

* Where the name of an argument appears in a lambda list, a clause of the form
  `(name TYPE [TEST])` may appear instead. `TYPE` is any legal Common Lisp type
  declaration, for example `integer` or `(real 0 100)`. `TEST` is an optional
  test which the supplied value of the argument must pass at runtime. This can
  be either an expression, or a symbol which will be taken to be the name of a
  predicate function which will be called with the value of `name` as its sole
  argument.
* Where the name of the function appears, a clause of the form `(fname -> TYPE
  [TEST])` may appear instead. Here, `TYPE` can be any legal Common Lisp type
  declaration, and refers to the return value(s) of the function. `TEST` is an
  optional expression or predicate function which will be called with the
  variable `result` bound to the function's return value (or to a list if the
  function returns multiple values). The test must return non-nil or an error
  is signalled.
* At toplevel within the function body, any or all of the following clauses may
  be included:
   * `(:returns TYPE)` - this declares the type of the function's return value.
     It should not be used it the type has been declared using the `(fname ->
     TYPE)` clause.
   * `(:pre TEST+)` - where `TEST+` is one or more expressions or predicate
     function names. Each of these will be evaluated when the function is
     called. They must all return non-nil, or an error will be signalled.
   * `(:post TEST+)` - these tests are all evaluated just before the function
     returns, with `result` bound to the return value (or to a list if the
     function returns multiple values). They must all return non-nil, or an
     error will be signalled.
* One or more arguments in a lambda list may be named `_`. Any such arguments
  will be given unique names and will be automatically declared `ignored`.


### Examples of function definitions


Define a simple function that adds two numbers, both of which
are declared to be real.

    :::cl
    (defun* sum ((a real) (b real))
       (+ a b))

Now also declare that the function returns a real.

    :::cl
    (defun* (sum -> real) ((a real) (b real))
       (+ a b))

Another way of declaring the function's return type.

    :::cl
    (defun* sum ((a real) (b real))
       (:returns real)
       (+ a b))

We want to ensure that `a` and `b` are never negative.
One way is to alter the type declarations:

    :::cl
    (defun* (sum -> (real 0)) ((a (real 0)) (b (real 0)))
       (+ a b))

Another way is to define a new type:

    :::cl
    (deftype natural () '(real 0))
    (defun* (sum -> natural) ((a natural) (b natural))
     (+ a b))

Another way is to use assertions:

    :::cl
    (defun* (sum -> real (>= result 0)) ((a real (>= a 0)) (b real (>= b 0)))
       (+ a b))

Or:

    :::cl
    (defun* sum ((a real (>= a 0)) (b real (>= b 0)))
       (:returns real (>= result 0))
       (+ a b))

Or, using the feature that the names of single-argument predicate
functions can be used as assertions:

    :::cl
    (defun* (naturalp -> boolean) ((x real))
       (not (minusp x)))
    ...
    (defun* (sum -> real naturalp) ((a real naturalp) (b real naturalp))
       (+ a b))

Another approach is to use `:pre` and `:post` clauses. Each contains one
or more forms, ALL of which must evaluate to non-nil. Within `:post`
forms, result is bound to the value that the function or form
is about to return.

    :::cl
    (defun* (sum -> real) ((a real) (b real))
       (:pre (>= a 0) (>= b 0))
       (:post (>= result 0))
       (+ a b))


## Ignoring arguments


Here is a simple function that ignores all its arguments after the first:

    :::cl
    (defun* my-first (item &rest _)
      item)


## Multiple return values


A function that returns multiple values.

    :::cl
    (defun* (floor -> (values integer integer)) ((n real) (d real))
       (cl:floor n d))

It is possible to use assertions with functions that return
multiple values. When a function is declared to return multiple
values, `result` will be bound to a _list_ of those values.

    :::cl
    (defun* floor ((n real) (d real))
       (:returns (values integer integer)
                (< (second result) (first result)))
       (cl:floor n d))

To declare that a function returns an unspecified number of
values, of unspecified types:

    :::cl
    (defun* (floor -> (values)) ((n real) (d real))
       ...)


## Type declarations for `&rest`, `&optional` and keyword arguments


The type of a `&rest` argument can be declared. The declaration
refers to the types of each element in the list of arguments
stored in the `&rest` argument.

    :::cl
    (defun* (+ -> real) (&rest (numbers real))
       (apply #'cl:+ numbers))

A more complicated lambda list. Note that the function and its first argument
do not have type declarations. Also note the syntax of typed keyword arguments:

    ((var TYPE [ASSERTION]) DEFAULT [SUPPLIEDP])

Note that `&optional` arguments use the same syntax.

    :::cl
    (defun* my-find (item (seq sequence) &key (from-end boolean)
                     ((test (or null (function (t)))) nil)
                     ((test-not (or null (function (t)))) nil)
                     ((key (or null (function (t)))) nil)
                     (start fixnum) (end fixnum))
       ...function body...)


## `defmethod*` and `defgeneric*`


Here is an example of method definition. All the arguments in the arglist are
normal 'specialised' arguments like you would usually find in a method
definition. The form still allows you to include an assertion with each
argument, however (`plusp` in this case).

    :::cl
    (defmethod* (cell-value -> real) :around ((sheet <Sheet>)
                                              (x integer plusp) (y integer plusp))
        ...)

Note that when you declare a return type for a method, the method body will
perform type-checking, but no toplevel `declaim` form will be generated.

CLOS function dispatch based on classes is limited; you cannot specialise on
user-defined types unless they are proper classes, for example. You may
therefore sometimes want to declare that a method's argument is of a particular
type, as well as declaring its class for specialisation as you normally would.

Here is an example. Note the similarity to the syntax for keyword arguments.

    :::cl
    (defmethod* (cell-value -> real) :around ((sheet <Sheet>)
                                              ((x natural plusp) integer)
                                              ((y natural plusp) integer))
       ...)

An example of `defgeneric*`, mainly useful to declare the return type of a set
of methods. Note the documentation string can appear after the argument list,
similar to `defun`.

    :::cl
    (defgeneric* (cell-value -> real) (sheet x y)
      "Return the value of the cell at coordinates X,Y in SHEET.")

`defgeneric*` can also be used to declare types of arguments. Be careful that
these don't clash with specialisers in method definitions.

    :::cl
    (defgeneric* (cell-value -> real) (sheet (x natural) (y natural)))


## `defvar*` and `defparameter*`


Used to declare the types of global variables.


    :::cl
    (defvar* (*user-name* string) "Bob")


    :::cl
    (defparameter* (*file-position* (integer 0)) 0)


## `*let`

This statement behaves like `let*`, with the following differences:

* When a type is given between the variable name and expression, this is
  converted to a local declaration of the type of the variable, within the
  scope of the `*let` form.
* When the form to be bound is a lambda list or cons cell, `*let` behaves like
  `destructuring-bind`. The value of the expression is destructured and
  elements are bound to the arguments in the lambda list or cons cell.
* When the form to be bound is a list whose first element is `:values`, `*let`
  behaves like `multiple-value-bind`, using the rest of the elements in the
  form as the variables to be bound. Those elements may be symbols, or lists of
  the form `(SYMBOL TYPE)`, in which case the bound symbol will be declared to
  be of the given type.
* Any variables whose names are '_', either bare or inside a form to be
  destructured, will be renamed with unique symbols and declared `ignored`
  within the body. This provides a quick way to ignore arguments or parts of
  arguments.

For example,

    :::cl
    (*let ((name "Bob")
           (age integer 40)
           (sex (member :male :female) :male)
           ((num street &optional suburb) address)
           ((:values (day fixnum) month year) birthday))
       ...body...)

Expands to:

    :::cl
    (let ((name "Bob"))
      (let ((age 40))
        (declare (integer age))
        (let ((sex :male))
          (declare ((member :male :female) sex))
          (destructuring-bind
              (num street &optional suburb) address
            (multiple-value-bind (day month year) birthday
              (declare (fixnum day))
              ...body...)))))

Arguments can also be auto-ignored within `*let` statements by naming them
`_`:

    :::cl
    (*let (((top . _) list))
       (print top))


## `nlet`


This statement is identical to let, except that a name comes before the binding
clauses. Within the body of the `nlet`, this name can be called like a
function, with arguments corresponding to the local variables bound in the
`nlet` statement. Calling this function returns execution to the start of the
`nlet` body, but the local variables will be bound to the values given to the
function rather than the values specified in the `nlet` binding clauses.

`nlet` is intended to provided the same functionality as Scheme's named `let`.
The macro does not perform tail call optimisation itself. However all modern
Common Lisp implementations will perform TCO on the generated code (I am
assured).


## Type declaration versus type checking


Technically, `declare`, `declaim` and the like do not actually check that
values stored in the associated variables conform to the declared type. They
merely constitute a promise _by the programmer_ that only values of the
specified type will be stored there. The consequences of storing a string in a
variable that is declared to be of type integer, are technically 'undefined'.

In practice, most modern Common Lisp implementations perform type-checking
based on declaration information, especially when the `safety` setting is high.

Defstar allows you to force lisp to perform type checking based on
declarations. If you set the global variable
`*check-argument-types-explicitly?*` to non-nil, `check-type` forms will be
inserted in the body of each function or method, causing an error to be raised
if a value does not match its declared type.


## Limitations


Definitions of `setf` methods cannot include return type declarations in the
method 'header'. The return type can still be declared using a `(:returns ...)`
form.

Incorrect:

    :::cl
    (defmethod (setf (foo -> integer)) (...args...)
       ...)

Correct:

    (defmethod (setf foo) (...args...)
       (:returns integer)                  ; legal
       ...)


## Syntax highlighting of Defstar macros in Emacs


Put the following code in your `.emacs` if you want `defvar*` and other forms
to appear in the same face as their normal counterparts, and if you want their
docstrings to also be correctly identified as docstrings rather than normal
strings.


    :::cl
    ;; fontify doc strings in correct face
    ;; lisp-mode already fontifies 'defun*' correctly
    (put 'defvar*   'doc-string-elt 3)
    (put 'defparameter*   'doc-string-elt 3)
    (put 'lambda*   'doc-string-elt 2)

    (defvar *lisp-special-forms*
    (regexp-opt '("defvar*"
                  "defconstant*"
                  "defparameter*"
                  "defgeneric*"
                  "defmethod*"
                  "lambda*"
                  "flet*"
                  "labels*") 'words))
    (font-lock-add-keywords 'lisp-mode
      `((,*lisp-special-forms* . font-lock-keyword-face)))

Commit message:

The return type of a function can now be specified as ':void', which is a synonym for '(values)', i.e. it signifies that the function returns nothing.
Fixed a problem with naming of the block that surrounds a function's contents.

README.md, after:

# The DEFSTAR library


Defstar is a collection of Common Lisp macros that can be used in place of
`defun`, `defmethod`, `defgeneric`, `defvar`, `defparameter`, `flet`, `labels`,
`let*` and `lambda`. Each macro has the same name as the form it replaces, with
a star added at the end, e.g. `defun*`. (the exception is the `let*`
replacement, which is called `*let`).

The macros allow:

* easy inclusion of type declarations for arguments in lambda lists
* easy inclusion of return type declarations in function and method definitions
* easy declaration of variables as 'ignored', by the use of '_' as a
  placeholder variable in argument lists.
* easy inclusion of assertions for each argument and for the function's
  return value, thus allowing simple programming by contract.

See below for a detailed discussion of each macro, with usage examples.

Defstar's home is at http://bitbucket.org/eeeickythump/defstar/.

Installation requires [ASDF][] or [Quicklisp][]. Defstar does not depend on
any other libraries.


[ASDF]: http://common-lisp.net/project/asdf/
[Quicklisp]: http://quicklisp.org


## Function definitions


The function-defining macros (`defun*`, `flet*`, `labels*`, `lambda*`) work the
same as their normal counterparts, with the following exceptions:

* Where the name of an argument appears in a lambda list, a clause of the form
  `(name TYPE [TEST])` may appear instead. `TYPE` is any legal Common Lisp type
  declaration, for example `integer` or `(real 0 100)`. `TEST` is an optional
  test which the supplied value of the argument must pass at runtime. This can
  be either an expression, or a symbol which will be taken to be the name of a
  predicate function which will be called with the value of `name` as its sole
  argument.
* Where the name of the function appears, a clause of the form `(fname -> TYPE
  [TEST])` may appear instead. Here, `TYPE` can be any legal Common Lisp type
  declaration, and refers to the return value(s) of the function. For functions
  that return no values, the type specifier `(values)` should be used;
  alternatively, `:void` can be used as a synonym for `(values)`. `TEST` is an
  optional expression or predicate function which will be called with the
  variable `result` bound to the function's return value (or to a list if the
  function returns multiple values). The test must return non-nil or an error
  is signalled.
* At toplevel within the function body, any or all of the following clauses may
  be included:
   * `(:returns TYPE)` - this declares the type of the function's return value.
     It should not be used it the type has been declared using the `(fname ->
     TYPE)` clause.
   * `(:pre TEST+)` - where `TEST+` is one or more expressions or predicate
     function names. Each of these will be evaluated when the function is
     called. They must all return non-nil, or an error will be signalled.
   * `(:post TEST+)` - these tests are all evaluated just before the function
     returns, with `result` bound to the return value (or to a list if the
     function returns multiple values). They must all return non-nil, or an
     error will be signalled.
* One or more arguments in a lambda list may be named `_`. Any such arguments
  will be given unique names and will be automatically declared `ignored`.


### Examples of function definitions


Define a simple function that adds two numbers, both of which
are declared to be real.

    :::cl
    (defun* sum ((a real) (b real))
       (+ a b))

Now also declare that the function returns a real.

    :::cl
    (defun* (sum -> real) ((a real) (b real))
       (+ a b))

Another way of declaring the function's return type.

    :::cl
    (defun* sum ((a real) (b real))
       (:returns real)
       (+ a b))

We want to ensure that `a` and `b` are never negative.
One way is to alter the type declarations:

    :::cl
    (defun* (sum -> (real 0)) ((a (real 0)) (b (real 0)))
       (+ a b))

Another way is to define a new type:

    :::cl
    (deftype natural () '(real 0))
    (defun* (sum -> natural) ((a natural) (b natural))
     (+ a b))

Another way is to use assertions:

    :::cl
    (defun* (sum -> real (>= result 0)) ((a real (>= a 0)) (b real (>= b 0)))
       (+ a b))

Or:

    :::cl
    (defun* sum ((a real (>= a 0)) (b real (>= b 0)))
       (:returns real (>= result 0))
       (+ a b))

Or, using the feature that the names of single-argument predicate
functions can be used as assertions:

    :::cl
    (defun* (naturalp -> boolean) ((x real))
       (not (minusp x)))
    ...
    (defun* (sum -> real naturalp) ((a real naturalp) (b real naturalp))
       (+ a b))

Another approach is to use `:pre` and `:post` clauses. Each contains one
or more forms, ALL of which must evaluate to non-nil. Within `:post`
forms, result is bound to the value that the function or form
is about to return.

    :::cl
    (defun* (sum -> real) ((a real) (b real))
       (:pre (>= a 0) (>= b 0))
       (:post (>= result 0))
       (+ a b))


## Ignoring arguments


Here is a simple function that ignores all its arguments after the first:

    :::cl
    (defun* my-first (item &rest _)
      item)


## Multiple return values


A function that returns multiple values.

    :::cl
    (defun* (floor -> (values integer integer)) ((n real) (d real))
       (cl:floor n d))

It is possible to use assertions with functions that return
multiple values. When a function is declared to return multiple
values, `result` will be bound to a _list_ of those values.

    :::cl
    (defun* floor ((n real) (d real))
       (:returns (values integer integer)
                (< (second result) (first result)))
       (cl:floor n d))

To declare that a function returns an unspecified number of
values, of unspecified types:

    :::cl
    (defun* (floor -> (values)) ((n real) (d real))
       ...)

## No return values

    :::cl
    (defun* (print-message -> (values)) ((fmt string) &rest args)
       (apply #'format t fmt args)
       (values))

The type specifier `:void` has been defined as a synonym for `(values)`:

    :::cl
    (defun* (print-message -> :void) ((fmt string) &rest args)
       (apply #'format t fmt args)
       (values))


## Type declarations for `&rest`, `&optional` and keyword arguments


The type of a `&rest` argument can be declared. The declaration
refers to the types of each element in the list of arguments
stored in the `&rest` argument.

    :::cl
    (defun* (+ -> real) (&rest (numbers real))
       (apply #'cl:+ numbers))

A more complicated lambda list. Note that the function and its first argument
do not have type declarations. Also note the syntax of typed keyword arguments:

    ((var TYPE [ASSERTION]) DEFAULT [SUPPLIEDP])

Note that `&optional` arguments use the same syntax.

    :::cl
    (defun* my-find (item (seq sequence) &key (from-end boolean)
                     ((test (or null (function (t)))) nil)
                     ((test-not (or null (function (t)))) nil)
                     ((key (or null (function (t)))) nil)
                     (start fixnum) (end fixnum))
       ...function body...)


## `defmethod*` and `defgeneric*`


Here is an example of method definition. All the arguments in the arglist are
normal 'specialised' arguments like you would usually find in a method
definition. The form still allows you to include an assertion with each
argument, however (`plusp` in this case).

    :::cl
    (defmethod* (cell-value -> real) :around ((sheet <Sheet>)
                                              (x integer plusp) (y integer plusp))
        ...)

Note that when you declare a return type for a method, the method body will
perform type-checking, but no toplevel `declaim` form will be generated.

CLOS function dispatch based on classes is limited; you cannot specialise on
user-defined types unless they are proper classes, for example. You may
therefore sometimes want to declare that a method's argument is of a particular
type, as well as declaring its class for specialisation as you normally would.

Here is an example. Note the similarity to the syntax for keyword arguments.

    :::cl
    (defmethod* (cell-value -> real) :around ((sheet <Sheet>)
                                              ((x natural plusp) integer)
                                              ((y natural plusp) integer))
       ...)

An example of `defgeneric*`, mainly useful to declare the return type of a set
of methods. Note the documentation string can appear after the argument list,
similar to `defun`.

    :::cl
    (defgeneric* (cell-value -> real) (sheet x y)
      "Return the value of the cell at coordinates X,Y in SHEET.")

`defgeneric*` can also be used to declare types of arguments. Be careful that
these don't clash with specialisers in method definitions.

    :::cl
    (defgeneric* (cell-value -> real) (sheet (x natural) (y natural)))


## `defvar*` and `defparameter*`


Used to declare the types of global variables.


    :::cl
    (defvar* (*user-name* string) "Bob")


    :::cl
    (defparameter* (*file-position* (integer 0)) 0)


## `*let`

This statement behaves like `let*`, with the following differences:

* When a type is given between the variable name and expression, this is
  converted to a local declaration of the type of the variable, within the
  scope of the `*let` form.
* When the form to be bound is a lambda list or cons cell, `*let` behaves like
  `destructuring-bind`. The value of the expression is destructured and
  elements are bound to the arguments in the lambda list or cons cell.
* When the form to be bound is a list whose first element is `:values`, `*let`
  behaves like `multiple-value-bind`, using the rest of the elements in the
  form as the variables to be bound. Those elements may be symbols, or lists of
  the form `(SYMBOL TYPE)`, in which case the bound symbol will be declared to
  be of the given type.
* Any variables whose names are '_', either bare or inside a form to be
  destructured, will be renamed with unique symbols and declared `ignored`
  within the body. This provides a quick way to ignore arguments or parts of
  arguments.

For example,

    :::cl
    (*let ((name "Bob")
           (age integer 40)
           (sex (member :male :female) :male)
           ((num street &optional suburb) address)
           ((:values (day fixnum) month year) birthday))
       ...body...)

Expands to:

    :::cl
    (let ((name "Bob"))
      (let ((age 40))
        (declare (integer age))
        (let ((sex :male))
          (declare ((member :male :female) sex))
          (destructuring-bind
              (num street &optional suburb) address
            (multiple-value-bind (day month year) birthday
              (declare (fixnum day))
              ...body...)))))

Arguments can also be auto-ignored within `*let` statements by naming them
`_`:

    :::cl
    (*let (((top . _) list))
       (print top))


## `nlet`


This statement is identical to let, except that a name comes before the binding
clauses. Within the body of the `nlet`, this name can be called like a
function, with arguments corresponding to the local variables bound in the
`nlet` statement. Calling this function returns execution to the start of the
`nlet` body, but the local variables will be bound to the values given to the
function rather than the values specified in the `nlet` binding clauses.

`nlet` is intended to provided the same functionality as Scheme's named `let`.
The macro does not perform tail call optimisation itself. However all modern
Common Lisp implementations will perform TCO on the generated code (I am
assured).


## Type declaration versus type checking


Technically, `declare`, `declaim` and the like do not actually check that
values stored in the associated variables conform to the declared type. They
merely constitute a promise _by the programmer_ that only values of the
specified type will be stored there. The consequences of storing a string in a
variable that is declared to be of type integer, are technically 'undefined'.

In practice, most modern Common Lisp implementations perform type-checking
based on declaration information, especially when the `safety` setting is high.

Defstar allows you to force lisp to perform type checking based on
declarations. If you set the global variable
`*check-argument-types-explicitly?*` to non-nil, `check-type` forms will be
inserted in the body of each function or method, causing an error to be raised
if a value does not match its declared type.


## Limitations


Definitions of `setf` methods cannot include return type declarations in the
method 'header'. The return type can still be declared using a `(:returns ...)`
form.

Incorrect:

    :::cl
    (defmethod (setf (foo -> integer)) (...args...)
       ...)

Correct:

    (defmethod (setf foo) (...args...)
       (:returns integer)                  ; legal
       ...)


## Syntax highlighting of Defstar macros in Emacs


Put the following code in your `.emacs` if you want `defvar*` and other forms
to appear in the same face as their normal counterparts, and if you want their
docstrings to also be correctly identified as docstrings rather than normal
strings.


    :::cl
    ;; fontify doc strings in correct face
    ;; lisp-mode already fontifies 'defun*' correctly
    (put 'defvar*   'doc-string-elt 3)
    (put 'defparameter*   'doc-string-elt 3)
    (put 'lambda*   'doc-string-elt 2)

    (defvar *lisp-special-forms*
    (regexp-opt '("defvar*"
                  "defconstant*"
                  "defparameter*"
                  "defgeneric*"
                  "defmethod*"
                  "lambda*"
                  "flet*"
                  "labels*") 'words))
    (font-lock-add-keywords 'lisp-mode
      `((,*lisp-special-forms* . font-lock-keyword-face)))
